.\" ****************************************************************************
.\"  record_configure_type.3                                 recorder library
.\" ****************************************************************************
.\"
.\"   File Description:
.\"
.\"     Man page for the recorder library
.\"
.\"     This documents
.\"       record_configure_type(3)
.\"
.\"
.\"
.\"
.\" ****************************************************************************
.\"  (C) 2019 Christophe de Dinechin <christophe@dinechin.org>
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(LGPLv2+_DOC_FULL)
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU Lesser General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU Lesser General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, see
.\" <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\" ****************************************************************************

.TH recorder_configure_type 3  "2019-03-09" "1.0" "Recorder Library"

.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH NAME
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
record_configure_type \- Configure format characters for event records


.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH SYNOPSIS
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.nf
.B #include <recorder/recorder.h>
.PP
.BI "typedef size_t (*recorder_type_fn)(intptr_t " trace ","
.BI "                                   const char *" format ","
.BI "                                    char *" buffer ","
.BI "                                    size_t" length ","
.BI "                                    uintptr_t" data ");"
.BI "recorder_type_fn   recorder_configure_type(uint8_t" id ", recorder_type_fn" type ");"

.fi
.PP


.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.PP
The
.BR record_configure_type
configures a type formatting character identified by
.I id
that can then be used in
.BR record(3)
format strings.
This is normally used to add special extensions to the printf format
that deal with to frequently used data types in the program. In the
example below, we use
.B "record_configure_type('t', todo_format)"
so that the
.B %t
format sequence will format
.B struct todo *
pointers.

.PP
The function identified by
.I type
is called to perform the actual data formatting. It receives the
following arguments:

.TP
.I trace
is the tracing value associated to the recorder. This can be used to
implement safe pointer rendering similar to
.B %+s
i.e. only derefrence the given pointer if you know that it is safe to
do so. Note that if the format string is
.BI "%+"id
then the value of
.I trace
will be non-zero.

.TP
.I format
is the actual format string, which allows your
.I type
function to handle format modifiers or precision indicators similar to
the way printf does.

.TP
.I buffer
is the buffer where your function should write its output.

.TP
.I length
is the amount of space available in the buffer.

.TP
.I data
is the actual value stored in the recorder event, for example a
pointer to your data.


.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH RETURN VALUE
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.PP
The return value of
.B recorder_configure_type()
is the previous function handling the given format identifier.

.PP
The
.I type
function should return the size it would have written, in the same way
.BR snprintf(3)
does, i.e. the number of characters that it would have written,
irrespective of the size of the buffer.


.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH EXAMPLES
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.PP
The following program uses
.B recorder_configure_type()
to associate the function
.B todo_format()
to the
.B %t
format sequence. The function interprets its argument as a
.B struct todo *
pointer. The main program builds a to-do list from command-line
arguments, but it contains a subtle bug that causes it to crash if any
of the arguments happens to be "crash".

.PP
.in +4n
.EX
#include <recorder/recorder.h>
#include <string.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <stdio.h>

RECORDER(todo, 32, "To-Do List");

typedef struct todo
{
    const char *name;
    struct todo *next;
} todo;

size_t todo_format(intptr_t tracing,
                   const char *format,
                   char *buffer, size_t size,
                   uintptr_t arg)
{
    struct todo *t = (struct todo *) arg;
    if (!tracing || !t)
        return snprintf(buffer, size, "%p", arg);
    return snprintf(buffer, size, "todo@%p('%s')", t, t->name);
}

int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
    int a;
    todo *list = NULL;
    int crash = 0;
    recorder_dump_on_common_signals(0, 0);
    recorder_configure_type('t', todo_format);
    for (a = 1; a < argc; a++)
    {
        record(todo, "Argument %d is '%+s'", a, argv[a]);
        todo *next = malloc(sizeof(todo));
        next->name = argv[a];
        next->next = list;
        record(todo, "Created entry %t previous was %t", next, list);
        list = next;
        crash += strcmp(argv[a], "crash") == 0;
    }

    while (list || crash)
    {
        todo *next = list->next;
        record(todo, "Had item %t", list);
        free(list);
        list = next;
    }
}
.EE
.in -4n

.PP
The following shows what happens if you run the program normally
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B % todo eat pray love
.EE
.in -4n

.PP
The following shows what happens if you trace the program: the
.B struct todo *
values are formatted, showing additional information.

.in +4n
.EX
.B % RECORDER_TRACES=todo todo eat pray love
[34 0.000273] todo: Argument 1 is 'eat'
[35 0.000339] todo: Created entry todo@0x50ba80('eat') previous was (nil)
[36 0.000352] todo: Argument 2 is 'pray'
[37 0.000360] todo: Created entry todo@0x50ba60('pray') previous was todo@0x50ba80('eat')
[38 0.000368] todo: Argument 3 is 'love'
[39 0.000373] todo: Created entry todo@0x50ba40('love') previous was todo@0x50ba60('pray')
[40 0.000386] todo: Had item todo@0x50ba40('love')
[41 0.000394] todo: Had item todo@0x50ba60('pray')
[42 0.000477] todo: Had item todo@0x50ba80('eat')
.EE
.in -4n

.PP
The following shows what happens if the program crashes due to bad
input: the crash dump no longer indicates the content of the todo
pointers, since it would be unsafe to dereference them at that time.

.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B % todo crash and burn
[...]
[25 0.000052] recorders: Configure type 't' to 0x4011c6 from (nil)
[26 0.000067] todo: Argument 1 is 'crash'
[27 0.000146] todo: Created entry 0x1f9d260 previous was (nil)
[28 0.000150] todo: Argument 2 is 'and'
[29 0.000150] todo: Created entry 0x1f9d280 previous was 0x1f9d260
[30 0.000150] todo: Argument 3 is 'burn'
[31 0.000150] todo: Created entry 0x1f9d2a0 previous was 0x1f9d280
[32 0.000151] todo: Had item 0x1f9d2a0
[33 0.000152] todo: Had item 0x1f9d280
[34 0.000152] todo: Had item 0x1f9d260
[35 0.000172] signals: Received signal Segmentation fault (11) si_addr=0x8, dumping recorder
[36 0.000209] recorders: Recorder dump
.EE
.in -4n

.PP
Finally, the following shows what happens if you activate tracing and
the program crashes. In that case, the tracing part at the top shows
the detailed information. However, during the crash dump, the same
events are replayed again (putting them in context with other events),
this time without dereferencing the pointer.

.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B % RECORDER_TRACES=todo todo crash and burn
[...]
[34 0.000184] todo: Argument 1 is 'crash'
[35 0.000240] todo: Created entry todo@0xf6aa80('crash') previous was (nil)
[36 0.000250] todo: Argument 2 is 'and'
[37 0.000255] todo: Created entry todo@0xf6aa60('and') previous was todo@0xf6aa80('crash')
[38 0.000260] todo: Argument 3 is 'burn'
[39 0.000265] todo: Created entry todo@0xf6aa40('burn') previous was todo@0xf6aa60('and')
[40 0.000270] todo: Had item todo@0xf6aa40('burn')
[41 0.000275] todo: Had item todo@0xf6aa60('and')
[42 0.000279] todo: Had item todo@0xf6aa80('crash')
[...]
[33 0.000180] recorders: Configure type 't' to 0x4011c6 from (nil)
[34 0.000184] todo: Argument 1 is 'crash'
[35 0.000240] todo: Created entry 0xf6aa80 previous was (nil)
[36 0.000250] todo: Argument 2 is 'and'
[37 0.000255] todo: Created entry 0xf6aa60 previous was 0xf6aa80
[38 0.000260] todo: Argument 3 is 'burn'
[39 0.000265] todo: Created entry 0xf6aa40 previous was 0xf6aa60
[40 0.000270] todo: Had item 0xf6aa40
[41 0.000275] todo: Had item 0xf6aa60
[42 0.000279] todo: Had item 0xf6aa80
[43 0.000297] signals: Received signal Segmentation fault (11) si_addr=0x8, dumping recorder
[44 0.000309] recorders: Recorder dump
.EE
.in -4n


.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH BUGS
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.PP
Using this function will render your format strings wildly
incompatible with the standard
.BR printf(3)
format, possibly making your code less readable.

.PP
There is a very limited number of possible type identifiers. Using
this feature in a shared library may cause conflicts with other code
that would also want to override the same format character.

.PP
It is possible to override standard format characters using this
function. Whether this is a bug or a feature remains to be seen.

.PP
Bugs should be reported using https://github.com/c3d/recorder/issues.


.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH SEE ALSO
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.BR RECORDER_DEFINE (3),
.BR RECORDER_DECLARE (3)
.br
.BR recorder_trace_set (3)
.BR RECORDER_TRACE (3)
.br
.BR recorder_dump (3),
.BR recorder_dump_for (3),
.br
.BR recorder_configure_output (3),
.BR recorder_configure_show (3)
.br
.BR recorder_configure_format (3),
.BR recorder_configure_type (3)

.PP
Additional documentation and tutorials can be found
at https://github.com/c3d/recorder.


.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH AUTHOR
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Written by Christophe de Dinechin
