.\" ****************************************************************************
.\"  record.3                                                 recorder library
.\" ****************************************************************************
.\"
.\"   File Description:
.\"
.\"     Man page for the recorder library
.\"
.\"     This documents record(3) and record_fast(3)
.\"
.\"
.\"
.\"
.\"
.\"
.\" ****************************************************************************
.\"  (C) 2019 Christophe de Dinechin <christophe@dinechin.org>
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(LGPLv2+_DOC_FULL)
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU Lesser General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU Lesser General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, see
.\" <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\" ****************************************************************************

.TH record 3  "2019-03-09" "1.0" "Recorder Library"

.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH NAME
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
record, record_fast \- Fast event logging in circular buffers


.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH SYNOPSIS
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.nf
.B #include <recorder/recorder.h>
.PP
.BI "ringidx_t record(recorder_name " recname ", const char *" format ", ...);"
.BI "ringidx_t record_fast(recorder_name " recname ", const char *" format ", ...);"
.fi
.PP


.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.PP
The
.BR record()
function stores an event in the recorder identified by
.I recname.
The event record includes a time stamp provided by the
.BR gettimeofday(3)
function (or a similar absolute time function), as well as the
.I format
string and up to 12 additional arguments. The
.I format
string should follow the
.BR printf(3)
conventions, with the exceptions and additions indicated below.

.PP
The
.BR record_fast()
reuses the time stamp of the previous
.BR record()
function for the same recorder, making it approximately twice as fast
on some modern systems. The cost difference should be in the order
of the cost of a call like
.BR gettimeofday(3)

.PP
Event recording code is designed to remain active in your program at
all times. Unlike typical
.BR printf(3)
messages, events recorded by
.BR record()
are not generally intended to be seen immediately, but rather to be
shown laster, for example in case of crash. See
.BR recorder_dump(3).
Formatting only happens when the message is actually printed.

.PP
Events can also be
.IR traced
on a per-recorder basis. In that case, the
.BR record()
and
.BR record_fast()
functions will immediately format their output. See
.BR recorder_set_trace(3)

.SS Automatic end of line
.PP
Event records are always printed on an individual line. It is not
necessary to add a \fB\en\fR character at the end of the format
string. If one is present, it will have no effect.

.EX
    record(my_recorder, "Hello");
    record(my_recorder, "World\n");
.EE

.PP
The use of \fB\en\fR at other positions in the string is
possible and has the usual effect.

.SS Formatting character strings: %s and %+s
.PP
Since formatting an event may happen at an unknown time after its
recording, the \fB%s\fR and \f%S\fR formats are treated like \fB%p\fR
unless formatting happens as part of tracing. If you are passing a
character string that is known to be constant, or at least still valid
when it will be formatted, then you can use the \fB%+s\fR format
instead.

.EX
    const char *name[2] = { "false", "true" };
    record(my_recorder, "Value %d is %+s", value, name[!!value]);
.EE


.SS Extended format characters
.PP
It is possible to configure additional format characters. See
.BR recorder_configure_type.
When this function is used, format strings may deviate notably from
the
.BR printf(3)
standard, or may conflict with other extensions to that standard.


.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH RETURN VALUE
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.PP
The return value is the index of the event that was recorded. This
value is rarely useful and can generally be ignored.


.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH EXAMPLES
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.PP
The program below records its input arguments, and crashes if passed
.I crash
as the first command-line argument.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
#include <recorder/recorder.h>
#include <string.h>

RECORDER(program_args, 32, "Program command-line arguments");
int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
    int a;
    recorder_dump_on_common_signals(0, 0);
    for (a = 0; a < argc; a++)
        record(program_args, "Argument %d is %+s", a, argv[a]);

    if (argc >= 2 && strcmp(argv[1], "crash") == 0)
    {
        char *ptr = NULL;
        strcpy(ptr, argv[1]);
    }
}
.EE
.in -4n
.PP
When a crash occurs, previously recorded events are printed out on the
console.

.PP
The program below is an instrumented version of the classical
recursive Fibonacci computation. It uses several recorders
corresponding to different types of events, and activates warnings and
errors in a way that can be configured by setting an environment variable.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
#include <recorder/recorder.h>
#include <string.h>
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>

RECORDER(fib_main,    32, "Loops in fib function");
RECORDER(fib_loops,   32, "Loops in fib function");
RECORDER(fib_warning, 32, "Warnings in fib function");
RECORDER(fib_error,   32, "Errors in fib function");

int fib(int n)
{
    if (n <= 1) {
        if (n < 0)
            record(fib_error, "fib is undefined for negative value %d", n);
        return n;
    }
    record(fib_loops, "Computing fib(%d)", n);
    int result = fib(n-1) + fib(n-2);
    record(fib_loops, "Computed fib(%d) = %d", n, result);
    return result;
}

int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
    int a;
    recorder_dump_on_common_signals(0, 0);
    recorder_trace_set(".*_warning=35 .*_error");
    recorder_trace_set(getenv("FIB_TRACES"));
    for (a = 1; a < argc; a++) {
        int n = atoi(argv[a]);
        if (n >= RECORDER_TRACE(fib_warning))
            record(fib_warning, "Computing for %d may take a while", n);
        printf("fib(%d) = %d\n", n, fib(n));
        if (n >= RECORDER_TRACE(fib_warning))
            record(fib_warning, "Computation for %d finally completed", n);
    }
}
.EE
.in -4n
.PP
This program will produce an output similar to the following:
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
% fib 1 2 3 4 10 20 30 35 10 40 -1
fib(1) = 1
fib(2) = 1
fib(3) = 2
fib(4) = 3
fib(10) = 55
fib(20) = 6765
fib(30) = 832040
[2714667 0.177725] fib_warning: Computing for 35 may take a while
fib(35) = 9227465
[32575370 1.859156] fib_warning: Computation for 35 finally completed
fib(10) = 55
[32575547 1.859171] fib_warning: Computing for 40 may take a while
fib(40) = 102334155
[363735828 20.527882] fib_warning: Computation for 40 finally completed
[363735829 20.527887] fib_error: fib is undefined for negative value -1
fib(-1) = -1
.EE
.in -4n
The first column in trace outputs is the number of events that were
recorded. THe second column is the time in seconds since the program
started.

.PP
The same program can also be run with additional tracing or warnings,
for example:
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
% FIB_TRACES="recorder_location fib_loops fib_warning=3" /tmp/fib 3 4
/tmp/fib.c:33:[82 0.000496] fib_warning: Computing for 3 may take a while
/tmp/fib.c:18:[83 0.000561] fib_loops: Computing fib(3)
/tmp/fib.c:18:[84 0.000570] fib_loops: Computing fib(2)
/tmp/fib.c:20:[85 0.000575] fib_loops: Computed fib(2) = 1
/tmp/fib.c:20:[86 0.000581] fib_loops: Computed fib(3) = 2
fib(3) = 2
/tmp/fib.c:36:[87 0.000590] fib_warning: Computation for 3 finally completed
/tmp/fib.c:33:[88 0.000596] fib_warning: Computing for 4 may take a while
/tmp/fib.c:18:[89 0.000601] fib_loops: Computing fib(4)
/tmp/fib.c:18:[90 0.000607] fib_loops: Computing fib(3)
/tmp/fib.c:18:[91 0.000612] fib_loops: Computing fib(2)
/tmp/fib.c:20:[92 0.000619] fib_loops: Computed fib(2) = 1
/tmp/fib.c:20:[93 0.000625] fib_loops: Computed fib(3) = 2
/tmp/fib.c:18:[94 0.000664] fib_loops: Computing fib(2)
/tmp/fib.c:20:[95 0.000707] fib_loops: Computed fib(2) = 1
/tmp/fib.c:20:[96 0.000724] fib_loops: Computed fib(4) = 3
fib(4) = 3
/tmp/fib.c:36:[97 0.000741] fib_warning: Computation for 4 finally completed
.EE
.in -4n


.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH BUGS
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.PP
There is a limit to the number of arguments that can be passed to
.BR record()
and
.BR record_fast().
As of version 1.0, the maximum number is 12. If that number is
exceeded, the compilation error message is not friendly.

.PP
Bugs should be reported using https://github.com/c3d/recorder/issues.


.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH SEE ALSO
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.BR RECORDER_DEFINE (3),
.BR RECORDER_DECLARE (3)
.br
.BR recorder_trace_set (3)
.BR RECORDER_TRACE (3)
.br
.BR recorder_dump (3),
.BR recorder_dump_for (3),
.br
.BR recorder_configure_output (3),
.BR recorder_configure_show (3)
.br
.BR recorder_configure_format (3),
.BR recorder_configure_type (3)

.PP
Additional documentation and tutorials can be found
at https://github.com/c3d/recorder.


.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH AUTHOR
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Written by Christophe de Dinechin
